---
title: "Visions of Impossibility"
handle: "visions"
date: "June 10, 2025"
author: "Peter Bennett"
description: "The inequality of success in the San Francisco Bay Area. (ESSAY)"
---

I leave my friend’s apartment just after midnight. Every Wednesday, he hosts dinner at his San Francisco apartment for his friends: engineers at Standard Intelligence, an AI startup he co-founded; employees at Neuralink and Anthropic; students at Stanford and MIT and Minerva University. But when I step outside, the atmosphere changes. I walk briskly to the CalTrain station, past old men in tents and young women smoking and the few cars still on the road—half of which are Waymos—as I buy my train ticket to avoid a $75 fine. I board two minutes before the last train leaves the station.

My trip back to Stanford takes me through a world of contradictions. San Francisco, Silicon Valley, and the Bay Area’s many idyllic suburbs are more excited than ever, fueled by endless venture capital money and the prospects of artificial intelligence. But this excitement is isolated from the rest of the Bay Area, separated by socioeconomic and racial boundaries. The Bay Area is an extraordinarily multicultural region: its overall population is thirty-six percent white, twenty-eight percent Asian American, twenty-four percent Latino, and six percent African American (Bay Area Equity Atlas). However, these statistics smooth out severe geographic disparities. Palo Alto, the center of the Bay Area’s innovation, is 84% white and Asian American; Antioch, a city in the region’s poorer outskirts, is 56% Latino and African American (Bay Area Equity Atlas). Predictably, the median income in Palo Alto is 2.8 times higher than that of Antioch (Bay Area Equity Atlas). The Bay Area certainly has enormous wealth, but it is not equally distributed.

This essay seeks to uncover why these socioeconomic disparities exist. Why has Silicon Valley seen so much success, and why are minority groups left behind by that success? Sociological research has attempted to answer this question, but most sources analyze broad trends rather than the personal factors that might influence inequality. This essay uses the lens of film to better understand individual stories of success and inequality, allowing us to analyze emotional and psychological effects absent from current research. From these stories, it is clear that discrimination is a deeply personal issue and can only be resolved through careful, compassionate efforts.

### PROMISE AND PRIVILEGE IN SILICON VALLEY

To a certain demographic, the Bay Area is the center of the world. That demographic is the hundreds of thousands of workers in the tech industry, the defining trait of Silicon Valley and its fifty-mile stretch of gleaming cities and suburbs. 

The initial growth of Silicon Valley is typically attributed to the presence of Stanford University and support from the Department of Defense. The region’s electronics industry began with the Federal Telegraph Corporation, which received enormous navy contracts during World War I, and a prosperous new radio industry during the interwar period (Sturgeon 19, 38). With the 1950s came the “prodigious” Fairchild Semiconductor, whose “scores of spin-offs” and former employees produced much of Silicon Valley’s innovation throughout the mid-century (Saxenian 39). This industry was spurred by Stanford engineering dean Frederick Terman, who intentionally “support[ed] the entrepreneurial efforts of his students,” including hugely successful businessmen like William Hewlett and David Packard (Saxenian 39). Each corporation fed into the next, all sparked by Stanford and DoD involvement.

Still, many authors attribute the region’s growth to its intimate collaborative atmosphere rather than institutional support. Professor AnnaLee Saxenian, who studied the region for over a decade, found that Fairchild produced nearly every employee and startup in the region. The shared experience created a “sense of loyalty and trust” that allowed entrepreneurs to collaborate informally, even asking direct competitors to help solve problems and innovate faster (Saxenian 39). A 2010 analysis found that “spinoffs of leading firms performed especially well” for this reason, leading to enormous success in the immediate area of Silicon Valley (Klepper 29).

This collaborative spirit is clear in The Social Network (2010), which tells the uncomfortable story of Facebook’s founding and growth in Silicon Valley. In the film, Mark Zuckerberg and Facebook’s early employees immediately benefit from the region’s atmosphere, living together in a house directly across from early investor Sean Parker. Parker proclaims that the team “made the right choice” to come to Palo Alto, presenting the city as the place to be, where Zuckerberg and his team can focus on work and get easy access to capital and other resources.

Although fictional, The Social Network holds the key to understanding Silicon Valley. In the terms of Bourdieu, startups like Facebook require access to all three types of capital: social (connections), economic (investment), and cultural (interest in the company). One would thus expect to find innovation in major cities, where all forms of capital flow freely, but Palo Alto—a town of just 65,000—has all three necessary factors. Its social capital comes from its collaborative atmosphere, present since Frederick Terman’s efforts to create a community of entrepreneurs. This atmosphere allows rapid investment, including from former innovators and employees whose success gave them economic capital to spend. Finally, Facebook’s key discovery was that cultural capital can now be found online—in the film, Sean Parker famously remarks that “we lived on farms, then we lived in cities, and now we're going to live on the internet” (The Social Network). Success still depends on local cash and connections, but companies no longer need to share a physical space with their customers, who are concentrated in cities like San Francisco and San Jose.

Unfortunately, Silicon Valley’s unique attributes restrict success to a small, privileged group. Successful companies often sprout from experience at previously successful companies, making it difficult for newcomers to prosper. Gaining capital depends on local connections, which are most accessible to those privileged enough to grow up with them or gain them at Stanford. Finally, the isolated nature of the region means profit accumulates locally rather than being re-invested in a large city, which would benefit people from a much wider range of backgrounds. Since Silicon Valley is almost entirely white and Asian American, localized effects primarily benefit those groups at the expense of the Latino and African American population.

### ASIAN AMERICAN DISCRIMINATION

Even inside the innovative paradise of Silicon Valley, all is not as it seems. The Social Network portrays a Silicon Valley full of promise, with founders and venture capitalists living grandiose lives in Palo Alto while their startups enjoy immediate success. In reality, nonwhite individuals—mostly Asian Americans—are plagued by discrimination and unfair treatment. They might be paid well, but they do not enjoy the unfettered success Zuckerberg and his friends find so easily. 

Stereotypes abound within the companies that are Silicon Valley’s pride and joy. Asian Americans, who comprise most of the region’s nonwhite population, are vastly underrepresented in leadership positions—a phenomenon referred to by scholars as the “bamboo ceiling” (Anand & Huet). Broadly, this occurs because Asian Americans face discrimination for the same traits that would benefit white Americans. Scholars agree that the “prevailing image” of Asian Americans is that they are “diligent and pliant,” traits commonly sought after by companies (Li & Park 119). However, a 2020 study found that these traits were likely responsible for the bamboo ceiling, as Asian Americans are both less likely to advocate for themselves and less likely to be seen as leaders by white executives (Lu et al.). These double standards are clear in anecdotal evidence. In an effort to hear individual stories, Priya Anand & Ellen Huet interviewed tech workers like former Iterable Inc. CEO Justin Zhu, who found himself constantly being criticized for standard practices in the tech industry like wearing casual clothing to meetings. In the suburban community of Cupertino, white residents complained that Asian Americans did not engage with the community while also protesting a “God-damned Chinese Little League” and Asian American parent involvement in the school district (Li & Park 125, 127). Faced with constant antagonism, it’s no wonder many choose to keep their heads down.

Because these phenomena are personal, they are intimately present in fiction both intentionally and unintentionally. Often, writers simply create stories under the influence of their own biases, which we can then analyze as representative of society. In 1978, literature professor Edward Said popularized the concept of orientalism, identifying that many authors wrote long stories about the Orient (i.e. Asia) as a mystical, pristine, and backward region relative to the Western world. Scholars of modern literature identify a trend of techno-orientalism, where many writers describe Asia as so technologically advanced that it will soon dominate the world despite its supposed backwardness (Gong). These stories tell us indirectly that many Americans are worried about China and see it as otherworldly, which explains today’s subtle prejudice towards Asian Americans.

These individual generalizations may be more or less important, but they represent a dangerous trend: Asian Americans are unfairly treated as a homogenous group. This should not be an issue in theory, as Bay Area companies often pride themselves on being “post-race”; everyone is treated equally and respectfully as long as they’re competent (Anand & Huet). This equal treatment is exactly the problem, however. Few Asian Americans match the stereotype of the highly educated, hardworking, well-paid Silicon Valley employee. Across the US, this image may be somewhat true for Chinese and Indian American populations, who have average hourly wages about 1.5 times the US average. However, income inequality abounds: 90th percentile Chinese and Indian Americans have 14 and 9 times higher income, respectively, than their 10th percentile counterparts (Banerjee, Anand & Huet). The stereotype of humility may also be partially true: MIT professor Jackson Lu found that East Asian cultures do tend to discourage assertiveness in the workplace, but found no evidence for the same phenomenon in South and Southeast Asian cultures (Lu et al.). This makes sense—stereotypes are generally somewhat based in reality—but we must distinguish individual stories in order to paint a full picture of the Asian American experience.

Fictional stories written by Asian Americans are powerful tools of understanding because they describe the authors’ subjective experiences, which necessarily cannot be generalizations. They may not be accurate to reality—authors have biases as well—but they accurately describe perceived reality, giving us unusual and useful insights. One story useful for these insights is The Joy Luck Club, which follows the histories of four Chinese immigrant mothers and their daughters living in San Francisco. The book was written in 1989 and was the basis for a later film, which received positive reviews but was criticized by some for creating “caricatures” of its characters (Denby 64). This exaggeration allows us to better understand Asian Americans’ perceived reality, making the film more useful for analysis.

The first story told in The Joy Luck Club provides a hypothesis to explain the prevalence of Asian Americans in high-paying, high-status jobs like tech. An-Mei and Suyuan, mothers to Waverly and June respectively, push their children towards absolute success. Both are somewhat successful. Waverly becomes a youth chess champion and is known for her intelligence throughout the film, but both Waverly and June burn out quickly and quit their respective disciplines. This type of parenting is so common in East Asian culture that it has its own name, tiger parenting; a film about mother-daughter relationships would be incomplete without it. While the film does not dispel the stereotype, it does provide context, suggesting to a perceptive viewer that each mother’s style originates from the impossible conditions they faced in China. An-Mei witnessed her mother’s rape before being married to the man who did it and Suyuan was forced to leave all of her belongings, including her twin daughters, after a Japanese invasion. The film calls attention to both the parents and children, not picking a side but rather informing the audience.

The Joy Luck Club also portrays the struggle with humility faced by Chinese Americans in the Bay Area. Several major characters struggle to be assertive, allowing their lives to be dictated by others. Waverly emotionally remarks that even a glance from her mother Lindo controls her decisions. Lena is uncomfortable splitting costs evenly with her wealthy husband Harold but waits several unhappy years before telling him. Finally, Rose reinvents her life to be subservient to her husband Ted, unable to express her desires despite knowing she’ll lose her marriage otherwise. Of course, these stories are somewhat caricatured. Critics remarked that the film depicts mothers like Lindo in a harsh manner and men like Harold and Ted as “heartless” with less emotion and depth than they deserve (Denby 64). But if the book’s author and the creators of the film are telling us that their lives are dictated by the whims of their family, that they must change their lives to fit the expectations of aristocratic husbands, that generational trauma still haunts them to this day, and that they simply feel out of place in American society, perhaps we should listen to them and act accordingly.

### AFRICAN AMERICAN DISPLACEMENT

The unique setting of Silicon Valley creates a strange sort of suburbia. The innovators of Silicon Valley need somewhere to live, but unlike most major American cities, they do not simply sprawl out from a center but are sparsely distributed throughout the Bay Area. Divided by water, rolling hills, and highways, the Bay Area is divided into myriad suburban towns, most with 20-100,000 people and a strong collective identity. The three major cities of the Bay Area—San Francisco, San Jose, and Oakland—make up less than a third of its population.

Why? Some attribute it to transportation and single-family housing, the usual factors causing suburbanization. Early San Francisco had “some of the nation’s most extensive trolley systems,” which would soon give way to extensive highways (Walker & Schafran 15). Since the 1960s, the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) has similarly “funneled suburban residents from the outlying cities” into downtown areas with enormous efficiency (Self 155). The Bay Area has also long been known as a “mecca of the single-family home,” in part because its cities developed so late—all three major cities in the region have scores of single-family homes immediately surrounding their downtowns (Walker & Schafran 16). But the Bay Area is defined by another important quality: affluence. Of the 25 largest metropolitan areas in the US, the San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont area has by far the highest median household income at $133,437 (Guzman & Kollar). The tech and finance industries that dominate the region create a large middle class able to inhabit growing suburbs. 

Importantly, however, suburbanization is not necessarily driven by the consumer. Walker & Schafran identify a “supply-driven suburbanization” where companies intentionally create and market idyllic suburbs because they are enormously profitable (17). Developers keep costs down with simple, repetitive designs while creating a “pretense of luxury” to raise prices (18). In many places, this relentless expansion simply wouldn’t work—few regions could fill entire cities with upper middle class housing. But when affluent Bay Area tech employees need a place to live, developers have lines of single-family homes waiting for them.

Unfortunately, this model is too profitable. Like an invasive species, middle-income housing takes over where other developments already exist, choking out anyone who cannot afford it. In American Babylon, historian Robert Self chronicles this phenomenon in Oakland, a city originally characterized by the promise of a “postwar industrial garden” and an “endless horizon of upward social mobility” (8). In the 1950s, city planners sought to restore “blighted” regions of the city, which often genuinely needed support—some buildings had no running water or were simply dangerous to live in (Self 138). But more often than not, restoration meant redevelopment. A conservative Congress passed laws making it easier for governments to acquire property, encouraging cities to take control of and subsequently bulldoze decaying neighborhoods. This was the basis of the Acorn Project, which demolished a 50-block region of West Oakland and replaced it with “middle-income housing and new industry” (Self 141). West Oakland gradually became wealthier and whiter, with the area’s black population—shut out of high-paying jobs by rampant segregation—forced into the lower-income East Oakland. While Oakland’s white population accumulated generational wealth, black homeowners lived in redlined regions with few available loans or mortgages, preventing them from renewing their homes and moving up the social ladder as Oaklanders had once been promised.

This kind of housing inequality is the basis for The Last Black Man in San Francisco, a 2019 film that tells the semi-autobiographical story of Jimmie Fails, a young black man who attempts to reclaim his family’s old home in the city. Fails believed that his grandfather had built the home in 1946, only to be lost by his father in the 1990s; as such, he continues to improve the home while an older white couple lives there. The Last Black Man explores many of the factors that create inequality. Low-income families might rise into the middle class by working to buy and improve property, turning it into an asset that their entire family can take advantage of. Fails and his grandfather each do this, building and renovating their house with hopes of rising out of poverty. But because Fails’s father didn’t have the money to maintain the house, their family lost their main asset and was forced into discomfort.

As a semi-autobiographical film, The Last Black Man provides a glimpse of the personal side of inequality. Fails, playing a version of himself, is grounded only by his family’s history. When he discovers that the house was in fact not built by his grandfather, he spirals; the film ends as he rows past the Golden Gate Bridge directly into the Pacific Ocean. As the title implies, Fails portrays himself as the proverbial last black man in the city, clinging to the hope that he might be able to belong, refusing to admit what Fails in the modern day understands: San Francisco has no place for him. Nor for the many other black men and women that it has expelled to the regions of the city where the rich are afraid to walk alone at night, where preachers must stand for days and days to protest the dumping of radioactive material in their backyard, where a young man must wait twenty minutes for a bus before hitching a ride with a man he vehemently dislikes because the bus may never come and there is nothing he can do about it. This is the life Fails wants so desperately to escape.

### LATINO INVISIBILITY

The Bay Area’s Latino population is concentrated in its low-income outskirts. The Latino population is the lowest-earning demographic in the Bay Area, with a median salary of just $45,500 compared to the region’s overall median of $74,900 (Bay Area Equity Atlas). Much of the Latino population is concentrated in the North and East Bay, including majority-Latino cities like Bay Point and San Pablo, the two lowest-earning cities in the Bay Area (Allen & Li 2). In part, this is because they have nowhere else to live. Many Bay Area Latinos are immigrants or children of immigrants, and many speak English as a second language or not at all; thus, many are shut out from the world of opportunity in Silicon Valley.

The Latino experience is intensely personal, especially for immigrants, but we lack the opportunity to understand their experience. Although the Bay Area’s Latino population is four times larger than its African American population, extraordinarily few films, books, or other forms of media focus on local Latino stories. The highest-grossing film even remotely in this vein is La Mission (2009), an indie film about masculinity in Latino culture that earned just over a million dollars in box offices. Books like The Other Barrio by Michael Nava and What Night Brings by Carla Trujillo follow Latino characters in the region but did not achieve wide commercial success. If stories are set in California, they tend to follow Latino characters from the Central Valley, Los Angeles, or San Diego. This disparity is reflected in scholarship as well. A wide variety of information is available about discrimination against Asian Americans and African Americans in the Bay Area, but the same searches for Latino discrimination return almost no sources. 

This gap in storytelling is an unfortunate one. Many Latino communities are proud and vibrant, particularly neighborhoods of larger cities like the Mission in San Francisco. These communities struggle against redevelopment plans that threaten their homes, such as plans for new BART stations in the heart of barrios (Miño-Bucheli). As the Bay Area’s housing crisis worsens, Latino communities may be entirely forced out of city centers, making it even more difficult to hear their stories. It is out of the scope of this essay to determine why Latino stories are so rarely told. It may be due to the language barrier, exclusion from city centers, or countless other factors. Whatever the cause, this gap represents a missing piece in the puzzle of the Bay Area; our story is incomplete without it.

### THE REBIRTH OF SILICON VALLEY

Our world is slowly erasing traces of discrimination. Companies claim to live in a post-race world. The Supreme Court argues that affirmative action is no longer necessary. Film studios prioritize African American and Asian American stories hoping to undo past repression. But in those same films, we see a cry for help. We see writers and directors and actors painstakingly crafting details mundane and earth-shattering—a tub of ice cream whose cost did not need to be split, the claustrophobic room hosting a lawsuit from a betrayed co-founder, the death of an innocent friend and the eviction from a house that promised a stable new life—all to tell the audience that no, this world is not a fair one, we will suffer through it because we must but we are still suffering and you cannot pretend that everything is fine. These stories show us why we must care about a concept as abstract as inequality.

Inequality and discrimination are often dealt with through top-down methods: civil rights litigation, urban planning, community support. These policies and programs are certainly useful; it would be impossible to develop a post-race community without equality under the law and fair housing development. As we have seen, however, the effects of past injustices are far too complex to be solved by aloof, one-size-fits-all methods. Demographics, communities, and individuals may have unique needs or may be left behind by historical injustices that are difficult to correct.

How, then, do we meet these many needs? Doing so may be impossible, but to get as close as possible, policy makers and executives and community leaders must listen to the stories of their communities. This could be through countless media: film, radio stations, protests, public comments, conversations at a local cafe; anything that allows individual stories to be heard and acted upon. The Bay Area is a diverse region, and if at all possible, that diversity must be understood in granular detail. Only with that compassionate, precise understanding can every part of the Bay Area prosper.

## Works Cited

Allen, Sandy and Ena Y. Li. “A Look at Bay Area Poverty.” United Way Bay Area, June 2016, https://uwba.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/UnitedWay_BayArea_2016_Bay_Area_Poverty_Brief_June_2016_Final.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Anand, Priya and Ellen Huet. “Why Silicon Valley’s Many Asian Americans Still Feel Like a Minority.” Bloomberg, 6 August 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2021-08-06/why-silicon-valley-s-asian-americans-still-feel-like-a-minority. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Banerjee, Asha. “Understanding economic disparities within the AAPI community.” Working Economics Blog, Economic Policy Institute, 7 June 2022, https://www.epi.org/blog/understanding-economic-disparities-within-the-aapi-community/. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Bay Area Equity Atlas. “Race/ethnicity: Nurturing diversity and increasing equity are critical to our region’s future.” Bay Area Equity Atlas, https://bayareaequityatlas.org/indicators/race-ethnicity. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Denby, David. “The Good Enough Mother.” New York Magazine, 20 Sept. 1993. 

Gong, Chloe. “Techno-Orientalism in Science Fiction.” thechloegong.com, https://thechloegong.com/2019/12/28/techno-orientalism-in-science-fiction/. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Guzman, Gloria and Melissa Kollar. “Income in the United States: 2023.” United States Census Bureau, 10 Sept. 2024, https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2024/demo/p60-282.html. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Klepper, Steven. “The origin and growth of industry clusters: The making of Silicon Valley and Detroit.” Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 67, no. 1, 2010, pp. 15-32.Saxenian, AnnaLee. “Institutions and the Growth of Silicon Valley.” Berkeley Planning Journal, vol. 6, no. 1, 1991, pp. 36-57. 

Li, Wei and Edward J. W. Park. “Asian Americans in Silicon Valley: High-Technology Industry Development and Community Transformation.” From Urban Enclave to Ethnic Suburb: New Asian Communities in Pacific Rim Countries, edited by Wei Li, University of Hawai'i Press, 2006, pp. 119-133.

Lu, Jackson G., et al. “Why East Asians but not South Asians are underrepresented in leadership positions in the United States.” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 117, no. 9, pp. 4590-4600. doi:10.1073/pnas.1918896117.

Miño-Bucheli, Sebastian. “Latinos in La Misión: A Story of Resistance and Community.” Bay Curious, KQED, 17 Mar. 2022, https://www.kqed.org/news/11906012/latinos-in-la-mision-a-story-of-resistance-and-community. Accessed 11 June 2025.

Self, Robert O. American Babylon: Race and the Struggle for Postwar Oakland. Princeton University Press, 2003.

Sturgeon, Timothy J. “How Silicon Valley Came to Be.” Understanding Silicon Valley: The Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region, edited by Martin Kenney, Stanford University Press, 2000, pp. 15-47. 

Timberlake, Justin, performer. The Social Network. Columbia Pictures, 2010.

Walker, Richard and Alex Schafran. “The strange case of the Bay Area.” Environment and Planning A, vol. 47, 2015, pp. 10-29. doi:10.1068/a46277.