---
title: "The Great American Etch-a-Sketch"
handle: "etch"
date: "March 20, 2025"
author: "Peter Bennett"
description: "How originalist judges misuse history. (ESSAY)"
---

“What would James Madison think of TikTok?”

That was the question asked by Jim McGraw, a longtime volunteer for the Center for Civic Education, at the California We the People state finals. We the People is a national competition organized by the Center that focuses on every aspect of the United States Constitution. Our team had prepared since October to answer questions on ongoing debates about the Constitution. As I heard McGraw’s question, my reaction—and the reaction of the rest of the team—was: Who cares?

The Founding Fathers, as they came to be known after Warren G. Harding’s 1921 inaugural address, are near-mythological characters in the United States. This was most famously described by sociologist Robert Bellah in his 1967 paper “Civil Religion in America,” which describes a “religious dimension” seen throughout American politics (40). Bellah identifies a “collection of beliefs, symbols, and rituals” from the country’s early years that Americans publicly revere (46). Historians identify a number of parallels between early America and Christian mythology; Bellah finds similarities between the Bible and the Constitution, between Moses and George Washington, and between Jesus and Abraham Lincoln (47-48). The Declaration of Independence is also a major element of worship; as early as 1824, Thomas Jefferson referred to the “holy purpose” of protecting its “sacred” principles (Maier 186). The Founding Era, defined here as the time period from 1770 to 1800, holds a special place in the American psyche.

In recent years, this devotion to America’s founding has overtaken the Supreme Court. The majority of justices on today’s Court subscribe to originalism, defined by legal scholar Erwin Chemerinsky as the idea that “the meaning of a constitutional provision is fixed when it is adopted” and should not evolve as society changes (14). Under this philosophy, the Founding Era is paramount. Originalists today typically interpret constitutional provisions “based on the ‘original public meaning’” when a provision was adopted (Chemerinsky 18). This typically requires investigating the meaning of individual words and determining what laws existed when the Constitution was ratified. For example, many new tests established by the Supreme Court ask judges to determine whether laws are “consistent with America’s tradition”—that is, whether similar laws existed at the time of the Founding (Greenlee). For example, in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization—the 2022 case that revoked a national right to abortion—the majority cited a 1997 test that required rights not in the Constitution to be “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition” (Washington v. Glucksberg 703).

As we will see, however, cases like Dobbs exemplify a fundamental issue of using history to interpret the Constitution. Because historical narratives are inherently simplified and shaped by the biases of those who construct them, originalist justices have deeply flawed views of history that perpetuate outdated ideologies and fail to resolve important problems. A living constitutionalist approach, which focuses on contemporary societal needs rather than historical trends, is more honest and more effective as a tool for constitutional interpretation.

### THE UNIVERSAL SIMPLIFICATION OF HISTORY

Let’s begin with a thought experiment. Consider Jim McGraw’s question: What would James Madison think of TikTok? Would he support it as a source for free speech and publications, or would he prefer that it not exist? McGraw’s question is relevant because an originalist judge might use Madison’s beliefs to determine whether, say, the TikTok ban passed by Congress should be blocked. As we will see, however, any answer to that question must reflect a simplified version of history.

A typical U.S. History student might answer that he would support it. Madison is known for being the author of the Bill of Rights, including its First Amendment rights to the freedom of speech and freedom of the press. Professor Wilfrid Rumble suggests that Madison felt that these rights were of “special importance,” attempting to restrict both federal and state governments from infringing upon them (139). However, Madison was initially opposed to the Bill of Rights. In Federalist No. 10, he argued that factions within government would check each other and prevent serious violations of rights. He was only willing to support the First Amendment after corresponding with Thomas Jefferson, an ardent supporter of individual rights (Bill of Rights Institute). This contradiction puzzles scholars of the Founding Era. Historian Saul Cornell describes it as the “Madison problem”: many of his views changed throughout his life, making it nearly impossible to answer questions like McGraw’s (2021, 1769). An answer taking one side or another would necessarily exclude some of Madison’s opinions.

Even interpreting Madison’s writings to determine his opinions is more difficult than it sounds. Historian Jill Lepore notes that as the Revolution becomes more distant, documents from that time become “inscrutable” as our language evolves, even requiring knowledge of how words’ definitions have changed over time (113). A historian trying to answer McGraw’s question might have a hard time discerning Madison’s true opinion.

Finally, it’s likely that Madison would simply default to modern opinions of TikTok rather than his own. As with many of the Founding Fathers, Madison embraced the idea of a living Constitution, a theory that interpretation of the Constitution should “change in response to new challenges” (Cornell 2021, 1770). Since TikTok represents an evolution of the concepts of speech and the press, Madison defers the duty of interpretation to us.

It’s clear that questions like McGraw’s are difficult to answer precisely, especially in a judicial context. The Founding Fathers had complex and often contradictory beliefs, making it almost impossible to make correct statements about them as a whole. Certainly, a historian who was an expert on Madison’s beliefs could likely postulate what his opinion might be, but the people making these decisions—judges, justices, lawyers—are not expert historians. For example, consider New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. Bruen, a 2022 case that required Second Amendment cases to use an originalist history-and-tradition approach. In a case the following year, District Court Judge Robert Payne expressed frustration with the test, explaining that his court “is staffed by lawyers who are neither trained nor experienced in making the nuanced historical analyses called for by Bruen” (Fraser v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 40). When confronted with problems like Madison’s changing beliefs, most individuals simply cannot resolve them properly.

As a result of this difficulty, any statement made about the early era of American history must necessarily be a generalization or simplification. This difficulty was well-known among the Founding Fathers. John Adams once predicted that the history of the Revolution would be “one continued lye from one end to the other,” recognizing that its stories would not be told accurately (Lepore 44). In fact, the Founding Fathers experienced the effects of this historical distortion; one eulogist wrote that by about 1820, “the estimation in which they [had] been held… [was] more of posthumous veneration than of contemporary respect” (Maier 190). If public memory of the Founding Era was unreliable in 1820, it is certainly unreliable today.

### WHEN HISTORY BECOMES A NARRATIVE

In the 1790s, the Declaration of Independence was an “embarrassment” to the Federalist Party, according to historian Pauline Maier (170).

This is surprising. One would imagine that the Federalists, whose platform was based on loyalty to the new U.S. government, would revere the document that first established that government. Maier’s claim would also be a surprise to writers like Burton Mack, who describes the Declaration of Independence as a “basis” for an American government that cherished “the value of personal freedom.” Yet historians broadly agree that the early days of the United States were characterized by very little devotion to the American cause. Pauline Maier, described by fellow historian Gordon Wood as “one of the most distinguished historians of the Revolutionary and Founding Era,” analyzes this aspect of early American society in her book American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence. Maier identifies that Americans only began to worship the Founding Era after the Treaty of Ghent ended the War of 1812, resulting in renewed patriotism and historical interest. By looking at this period of history, we find that the modern worship of the Founding Era is a result of intentional efforts to create narratives for political purposes.

Throughout the late 18th century, various political groups attempted to commemorate the Revolution to serve their political goals. This was commonly done through celebrations of the Revolution, which began in 1777 as the first Fourth of July festivals were held to honor American independence. As historian David Waldsteicher chronicles in his book In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes, these celebrations created a narrative of the Revolution that various actors could shape to their preference. Many were organized by “proto-Federalists,” who carefully shaped the festivities to promote a sense of national unity; for example, they generally included thirteen toasts (representing the thirteen states) that lauded national institutions and figures like George Washington (Waldstreicher 38). Descriptions of the events in newspapers had “intentional obscurity” to promote the image of “sameness,” which organizers hoped would also promote national unity (Waldstreicher 35). Similarly, Republicans promoted Fourth of July festivities and reprinted the Declaration of Independence as an enduring “definition of the rights of man” written by the “immortal Jefferson,” whose legacy they attempted to bolster (Maier 170-171). Since these proto-Federalists and proto-Republicans had opposite agendas, they commonly attempted to disparage each other’s attempts to win over the public. Battles raged over the content of Fourth of July toasts, for example, with some claiming the date as the “Dawn of Universal Liberty” while others called for “an Increase of Energy to our Federal Government” (Waldstreicher 88). 

After 1815 and the Treaty of Ghent, the memory of the Revolution was so “brilliant and daring” that various political groups “claim[ed] to have inherited it” and fought over its legacy (Lepore 23). In 1819, Republicans’ attempts to invoke Jefferson’s legacy would falter with the surfacing of the so-called Mecklenburg Declaration of Independence, a document supposedly written in 1775 containing much of the same language as the Declaration of Independence. Federalists like John Adams used the Mecklenburg Declaration to “undercut Jefferson’s celebrity” and disrupt the legacy of the Declaration of Independence that Republicans used to great effect (Maier 173). Later, in the famous Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858, both Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas attempted to claim the ideals of Jefferson. Lincoln argued the statement that “all men are created equal” intended to support the abolition of slavery and that to argue the opposite would be “changing the policy of the fathers” (Zarefsky 182). In contrast, Douglas noted that the slave-owning Jefferson would never agree with Lincoln; the Declaration of Independence must be referring to “white men” with “no reference… [to] any other inferior and degraded race” (Zarefsky 183). In both of these instances, the fight over Jefferson’s legacy indicates the immense power of the Founding Era among the American public. 

This battle for historical validation is analogous to originalism. Each politician or political party has their own set of beliefs based on modern facts rather than history. As with originalist judges, in order to convince others, they create a narrative out of history to provide evidence for their beliefs. Notably, however, these narratives always support the preferred side of their creator. Consider the Mecklenburg Declaration: Federalists used it to attack Republicans, while Republicans pointed to evidence that the document may have been faked. This effect is unsurprising—historical narratives are created by individuals with biases that will naturally lead them back to their existing beliefs.

The primary difference between rhetoric before and after 1815 is that only after 1815 can the Revolutionary mythos be taken for granted. The celebrations Waldstreicher describes actively attempted to create and alter public memory of the Revolution. Political groups shaped each celebration to actively change what aspects are remembered, leaving out the arguments that they disagree with. (For example, proto-Federalists omitted statements of individual liberty from their thirteen toasts.) In contrast, after 1815, individuals or groups with conflicting opinions simply worked with existing public memory of the Revolution. The Lincoln-Douglas debates, for example, only involved separate interpretations of Jefferson’s famous “all men are created equal” line, a statement that had already attained a near-mythological status in American society. Post-1815 actors, from Lincoln and Douglas to modern originalist judges, do not attempt to change what about the past is remembered; they only attempt to re-interpret that past. 

### THE IDEA OF A USABLE PAST

In 1918, literary critic Van Wyck Brooks published a short essay in The Dial, a Transcendentalist literary criticism magazine, titled “On Creating a Usable Past.” The essay criticized the lack of a distinct literary culture, particularly the lack of “individuality” and “vitality” in the U.S. compared to European literature. Brooks argues that this is primarily because Americans fail to use creativity when interpreting the past; instead of using its “inexhaustible storehouse of… adaptable ideals,” they attempt to build a comprehensive and bland model of history (339).  Although Brooks was interested in literary history, his essay was broadly influential among American intellectuals; according to historian Warren Susman, intellectuals became convinced that “an intelligent reading of the past”—i.e. a modern interpretation of the past—was necessary to “operate effectively in the world” (256). While few non-historians today are familiar with Brooks’ essay, the model of interpretation he advocates for are still around today. Politicians, lawyers, and judges today come up with “intelligent reading[s] of the past” to make arguments that are often entirely arbitrary and unfaithful to the history they describe.

Brooks’ essay argues for the creation of a “usable past,” later defined by legal scholar Cass Sunstein as a set of “elements in history that can be brought fruitfully to bear on current problems” (603). Sunstein finds the usable past to essentially be a version of history told by non-historians. He suggests that these non-historians—in his case, constitutional lawyers—cannot be held to the same standards as historians because they are “a different sort of creature altogether” (602). Instead of simply telling the facts of history, their role is “to make the best constructive sense out of historical events” (602). In order words, their role is to create a narrative using a selection of the facts—a usable past—that will be a specific contribution to modern history. For example, in the case of the constitutional lawyer, their narrative contributes to the long tradition of constitutional theory. 

The usable past gives us a tool to further analyze political narratives. Consider Lincoln and Douglas, who created opposing interpretations of Jefferson’s views on slavery. The two politicians created their interpretations of Jefferson’s unalienable rights so that they could be “brought fruitfully to bear on” the issue of slavery, which they hoped to resolve as future presidents (Sunstein 603). Historian Brian Steele finds that scholars continued to use Jefferson’s image in this manner well into the 20th century. He analyzes several works by Claude Bowers, a newspaper editor and writer who bolstered Democrats’ legitimacy in the 1920s by claiming they inherited the legacy of Thomas Jefferson. Bowers argued that society in the Gilded Age had become a “Hamiltonian plutocracy” and that Democrats were engaging in the Jeffersonian project of “[bringing] the government back to the hands of the average voter” (Steele 76). Later, libertarian author Albert Jay Nock would generously describe Jefferson as a “champion of the ‘producers,’” which would make him a staunch opponent of the New Deal’s supposed “‘conquest’” of the working class (Steele 84). Bowers’ and Nock’s interpretations were each “brought fruitfully to bear on” the issues of the time, casting aside a comprehensive historical account in favor of a specific, usable narrative of history (Sunstein 603).

While individuals may craft diverse narratives of history, selection pressures cause these narratives to combine into stereotypical overarching traditions. Scholars have long noted that people find comfort in singular, powerful stories. For example, historian Warren Susman finds that historical analysis in the late nineteenth century offered “utopian visions” as an alternative to the divisive backdrop of the Civil War and Reconstruction (253). More recently, historian and museum curator Roger Launius notes that in museum histories, many groups advocate for “feel-good” stories of a unified past, considering them necessary “for the good of the nation” (32). Susman argues that favoring these kinds of stories results in the creation of “American epics” of an “almost mythical” nature, with sweeping narratives of the past that are necessarily contrary to pure history (252).

Examples of these narratives perpetuate ancient stereotypes and are generally historically inaccurate. The example Susman provides is Frederick Turner’s Frontier Thesis, which famously argued that America's unique democracy and culture are a product of its western frontier. Turner aimed to create a usable past to solve “a set of specific problems… which were of significant moment” at the time, including immigration and unrest among farmers (Susman 254). The Frontier Thesis legitimized several long-standing American origin myths, particularly that the frontier is “primitive,” rugged, and “productive of individualism” (Turner). Historians find this account to be broadly incorrect; the frontier was more characterized by “people acting in groups” for collective survival (Slatta 3). However, leading American West historian Patricia Nelson Limerick finds that Turner’s myth has an “astonishing… persistence” because it acts as “cultural glue,” creating a shared tradition that Americans are unwilling to give up (Slatta 3). 

Well after Turner, historian Louis Hartz created a similar type of narrative with his 1955 book The Liberal Tradition in America, which attempted to explain why America lacked the social unrest and revolution seen in Europe. Hartz’s thesis was that because America “lacked both a ‘genuine revolutionary tradition’ and a ‘tradition of reaction,’” it was naturally disinclined towards unrest (Kloppenberg 93). Unfortunately, Hartz’s theory was just that: a political theory. Various reviews found that Hartz had used “vague and imprecise analysis” with “no substantial documentation,” instead using “arbitrarily selected essence to support [his] political intuition” (Kloppenberg 94-95). As a result, historians have generally moved on from Hartz’s sweeping narrative, working to understand the “conflictual and contradictory product of multiple political traditions”—particularly those of women and racial minorities—rather than crafting a single vision of America (R. Smith 549). 

Turner’s and Hartz’s failures reveal the near-impossibility of creating perfect theories of history. The natural temptation, among historians and non-historians alike, is to imagine a utopian usable past with a single clear tradition. As we have shown, however, these narratives simply mislead others and perpetuate inaccurate stereotypes. Their attractiveness only makes them more dangerous.

### USABLE PAST IN THE SUPREME COURT

Originalist judges rely on historical narratives to make decisions. In fact, that is all an originalist judge does. In order to decide a case, they imagine a single tradition across American history that cannot possibly be fully accurate. As a result, their decisions are arbitrary and dangerous to America.

Consider New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. Bruen, a case decided by the Supreme Court in 2022. In the majority opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas established a new test for violations of the Second Amendment, requiring that any modern regulations of gun rights have analogous Founding-era laws and be “well-established in American history” (Greenlee). Thomas and the majority then used this test to strike down a New York law that required a “special need” to carry a firearm in “sensitive places,” typically crowded public areas (Howe). Lawyer Joseph Greenlee applauded the decision, arguing that the previously established test was “manipulatable” and the decision “restor[ed] the Founders’ Second Amendment.” However, the new test was just as manipulatable, leading a vast number of legal scholars to criticize the decision.

To use the words of historian Saul Cornell, Bruen was a “constitutional “Etch A Sketch’” (2022). As in many of its recent decisions, the Supreme Court used history to paint the picture it expected instead of letting history speak for itself. Cornell describes the Court’s decision as “embarrassing,” with a “highly selective culling” of evidence that did not adequately reflect history (2022). As constitutional law scholar Jacob Charles notes, the opinion often “treat[s] laws in isolation and then remark[s] that the Court cannot rely on isolated laws” to justify the challenged law. For example, the opinion dismisses three laws from the Founding Era and one from the Civil War era because they do not “show a tradition of public-carry regulation,” despite being common and spread across multiple generations (New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. Bruen 37). Instead, according to Cornell, the opinion presents a “caricature” of historical gun usage, from descriptions of the “pistol-packin’ peasants” of Shakespearean England to “error-filled” accounts of Second Amendment rights at various points in American history (2022). 

The justices again crafted their own narratives in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the 2022 case that overturned Roe v. Wade and allowed states to make decisions about abortion rights. The majority determined that the right to an abortion was not consistent with the nation’s history and tradition. They found that early English scholars, “who the Founders looked to… to help form the Constitution,” suggested that English common law would not permit women to get an abortion (Trau 884). They also explained that because abortion was a crime in a majority of states during the 19th century, the 14th Amendment (the amendment responsible for privacy rights like abortion) would not have been intended to support Roe (Trau 886). However, the dissent and other interested parties find the opposite conclusion. The dissenting justices cite a brief by the Organization of American Historians that argues English common law and early American law would have protected abortion “before the fetus ‘stir[red],’” the point where a pregnant woman first feels the movement of the fetus (Ellsworth et al. 20). Lawyer Amanda Trau finds that state laws well into the 1900s followed the same practice, which roughly matches the protections originally given by Roe (886). 

Let’s take a step back to analyze what happened in Dobbs and Bruen. Because the cases could not possibly consider all of history, the judges could only consider a limited set of illustrative examples. The lawyers in each case thus constructed a usable past, i.e. a limited set of past laws and scholars that could be used to determine whether the case’s challenged law should stand. From those examples, the majority and dissenting sides developed independent narratives that directly countered each other. The six majority justices found that the US has no tradition of the law in question (limiting public firearm carrying in Bruen, guaranteeing abortion rights in Dobbs) and that the examples presented in the case are either inaccurate or outliers. Based on the exact same evidence, the three dissenting justices found that this tradition did exist throughout American and English history. It’s clear that the version of history constructed in each case was simply not enough to conclusively resolve each case’s question of interpretation.

### THE DANGER OF ORIGINALISM

Many originalists acknowledge the flaws in their dependence on history. The primary defense of the ideology is that it is still more useful than arbitrarily making decisions on interpretation, as some alternative theories suggest. Others, such as legal scholar Philip Bobbitt, argue that historical analysis is only one of several “modalities” of interpretation and is only an “instrumental, rhetorical device… to be deployed” alongside other types of interpretation (22). However, originalism still should not be used in constitutional interpretation because it is actively harmful to society, not simply ineffective.

According to legal scholar Erwin Chemerinsky, the “stronger defense” of originalism is that its method is “separate from the values or views of those who serve on the Court” (30). Because courts are intended to be neutral arbiters of laws and the Constitution, it makes sense that an objective approach would be ideal. To simply impose arbitrary value choices “violates the postulates of the Madisonian model,” the model that the US government’s structure is based on (Bork, qtd. in Chemerinsky 31). An objective approach would also lead to the outcomes that the Court is intended to produce. The late Antonin Scalia argued that using an objective approach would “lead to a more moderate… result” than defaulting to the potentially biased opinions of justices (2001, qtd. in M. Smith 813). Justices are typically interested in moderation—courts often aim to avoid so-called judicial activism or “legislating from the bench” (Cook). 

As this essay has demonstrated, originalism is far from objective. Because it is impossible to fully analyze history, judges must make their decisions based on incomplete narratives of history. As we have demonstrated, the same history can produce diametrically opposed narratives, often motivated by the beliefs of those who construct them. As a result, these narratives are highly subjective and thus unreliable for making decisions. However, originalists argue that even if justices cannot be perfectly objective, using history as a guide will lead them closer to objectivity, thus making it useful even as a tool. As we will see, this approach is dangerous and should not be used.

Using history to justify arbitrary decisions masks them in a false sense of truth that sways a balanced argument. Put simply, describing a subjective argument as objective gives it more rhetorical power than is justified. As legal scholar Reva Siegel notes, this practice began in the wake of Brown v. Board of Education, the case that began the mid-20th century wave of desegregation. Siegel finds that critics of the decision (i.e. those who preferred discrimination) “embraced originalism as the jurisprudential vehicle for their claims” (2008, 241). Segregationists used the supposed objectivity of originalism to “legitimate their [beliefs]… as the Constitution” (Siegel 2008, 241). In other words, they used their interpretation of the Constitution as a tool to support their existing beliefs rather than using an objective theory to shape their beliefs.

Siegel’s theory raises another alarm bell in regards to originalism. The false legitimacy created by originalism necessarily supports antiquated policies that are wholly rejected by society today. Racial discrimination is one of the most obvious examples of these policies. By referring to 18th and 19th century ideals, originalism “tells us Brown v. Board of Education was wrongly decided,” since laws from before the Civil War clearly supported segregation (Chemerinsky 94). Similarly, the 1967 case Loving v. Virginia went against historical tradition to rule that bans on interracial marriage violated the Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection under the law. “No originalist could have written that [decision]”—the Equal Protection Clause simply was not intended to cover interracial marriage, even though it should obviously be protected today (Chemerinsky 102). Even in cases unrelated to race, deferring to historical beliefs often perpetuates hidden discrimination. For example, the historical criminalization of abortion relied on in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization were products of “anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic feeling” (Siegel 2023, 926). Proponents of one 1867 Vermont law banning abortion hoped that it would prevent the “preponderance of births in favor of foreigners” and instead increase the American-born population (Butler, qtd. in Siegel 2023, 925). Whether or not abortion is justified today, defaulting to these ancient arguments is abhorrent. Policies like these should be consigned to their time, not perpetuated indefinitely.

### THE CASE FOR A LIVING CONSTITUTION

Several scholars have tried to correct originalism so that it becomes consistent with cases they believe are correctly decided, including the previously discussed Brown v. Board of Education and Loving v. Virginia. Legal scholar Jack Balkin has proposed a philosophy of “living originalism,” which emphasizes above all “adherence to [the] original principles” of the Constitution (Strauss 371). This principle allows the Constitution to evolve with society and avoids the previously described issues. For example, Balkin agrees with the justices in Brown because the Supreme Court ruled based on the principle of equal protection, even though their version of the principle was not the same as those who wrote the Constitution. 

Balkin’s approach has one fatal flaw: it is not originalism. The adapting Constitution Balkin embraces is fundamentally opposed to originalist principles. According to Antonin Scalia, one of the great originalist Supreme Court justices, “the Great Divide with regard to constitutional interpretation is… between original meaning… and current meaning” (1997, qtd. in Siegel 2008, 195). Scalia stood firmly on the side of original meaning, relying on evidence from the Constitution’s writers and from historical legislatures to determine the intent of the Constitution. By switching his focus to the current meaning of the Constitution, Balkin abandons the interest in historical analysis that is characteristic of originalism. 

Balkin demonstrates what has already been made clear in the previous sections: in order to construct a philosophy that correctly resolves important cases, we cannot use historical tradition to inform our decisions. Doing so prioritizes an arbitrary side of the decision, typically one that favors antiquated principles. Instead, judges should make decisions based on information from the present day. This might involve deferring to popular opinion, often filtered through the opinions of popularly elected legislatures rather than, say, direct polling. Judges might also simply decide based on what they believe would have the most beneficial outcome for society. These principles are the basis of a theory called living constitutionalism or pragmatism, which follows the Founders’ belief that the Constitution should “change in response to new challenges” (Cornell 2021, 1770). This philosophy, often regarded as the antithesis of originalism, was developed in the early 20th century and has since been adopted by many judges and Supreme Court justices.

Pragmatism certainly has its flaws. It requires judges to utilize their own opinions about modern society, which may be altered by their own biases and political beliefs. Opponents also argue that this reliance on opinion makes pragmatist decisions disconnected from the Constitution. Justice Clarence Thomas, one of the most ardent originalists on today’s Supreme Court, has argued that interpretation based on the pragmatist framework has “no more basis in the Constitution than the latest football scores.” While these claims are exaggerated—pragmatism still depends on the wording of the Constitution—they point to the valid critique that the philosophy is necessarily subjective.

As we have seen, however, originalism is no less subjective. Originalist judges are not historians and cannot perfectly represent history. When they attempt to use history for constitutional interpretation, they create caricatured narratives that are necessarily affected by their own opinions and biases. These narratives are far from impartial; instead, they favor decisions that have been thoroughly rejected by society. We should not depend on a philosophy that perpetuates these opinions indefinitely. Originalism keeps us in the past; pragmatism and a living Constitution allow us to move forward.

## Works Cited

Bellah, Robert N. “Civil religion in America.” Daedalus, vol. 134, no. 4, 2005, pp. 40-55.

Bill of Rights Institute. “James Madison and the Bill of Rights.” Bill of Rights Institute, https://billofrightsinstitute.org/essays/james-madison-and-the-bill-of-rights. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025.

Bobbitt, Philip C. Constitutional Interpretation. Blackwell Publishing, 1991. 

Bork, Robert H. “Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems.” Indiana Law Journal, vol. 41, no. 1, 1971. Maurer School of Law Digital Repository, https://www.repository.law.indiana.edu/ilj/vol47/iss1/1/. 

Brooks, Van Wyck. “On Creating a Usable Past.” The Dial, 1918, pp. 37-40.

Butler, L.C. “The Decadence of the American Race, as Exhibited in the Registration Reports of Massachusetts, Vermont [And Rhode Island]; The Cause and the Remedy.” Boston Medical Surgery Journal, vol. 77, 1867, pp. 89-90. doi:10.1056/NEJM186709050770501.

Charles, Jacob. “Bruen, Analogies, and the Quest for Goldilocks History.” Duke Center for Firearms Law, 28 June 2022, https://firearmslaw.duke.edu/2022/06/bruen-analogies-and-the-quest-for-goldilocks-history. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025. 

Chemerinsky, Erwin. Worse Than Nothing: The Dangerous Fallacy of Originalism. Yale University Press, 2022.

Cook, Catherine. “Legislating from the Bench.” Harvard Political Review, 3 Mar. 2009, https://harvardpolitics.com/legislating-from-the-bench/. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025.

Cornell, Saul. “Cherry-picked history and ideology-driven outcomes: Bruen’s originalist distortions.” SCOTUSblog, 27 June 2022, https://www.scotusblog.com/2022/06/cherry-picked-history-and-ideology-driven-outcomes-bruens-originalist-distortions/. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025.

Cornell, Saul. “President Madison’s Living Constitution: Fixation, Liquidation, and Constitutional Politics in the Jeffersonian Era.” Fordham Law Review, vol. 89, 2021, pp. 1761-1781.

Ellsworth, Jessica L. et al. “Brief for Amici Curiae American Historical Association and Organization of American Historians in Support of Respondents.” 14 Sept. 2021, https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/19/19-1392/192957/20210920133840569_19-1392%20bsac%20Historians.pdf. 

Greenlee, Joseph. “Restoring the Founders’ right to bear arms.” SCOTUSblog, 29 June 2022, https://www.scotusblog.com/2022/06/restoring-the-founders-right-to-bear-arms/. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025.

Howe, Amy. “In 6-3 ruling, court strikes down New York’s concealed-carry law.” SCOTUSblog, 23 June 2022, https://www.scotusblog.com/2022/06/in-6-3-ruling-court-strikes-down-new-yorks-concealed-carry-law/. Accessed 19 Mar. 2025. 

Kloppenberg, James T. “Requiescat in Pacem: The Liberal Tradition of Louis Hartz.” The American Liberal Tradition Reconsidered: The Contested Legacy of Louis Hartz, University Press of Kansas, 2010.

Launius, Roger D. “Public History Wars, the ‘One Nation/One People’ Consensus, and the Continuing Search for a Usable Past.” OAH Magazine of History, vol. 27, no. 1, 2013, Pages pp. 31-36. Oxford Academic, doi:10.1093/oahmag/oas048. 

Lepore, Jill. The Whites of Their Eyes: The Tea Party's Revolution and the Battle over American History. Princeton University Press, 2010.

Maier, Pauline. American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 1997.

Rumble, Wilfrid E. “James Madison on the Value of Bills of Rights.” Nomos, vol. 20, 1979, pp. 122-162.

Scalia, Antonin. A Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law. Princeton University Press, 1997. 

Scalia, Antonin. “Originalism: The Lesser Evil.” University of Cincinnati Law Review, vol. 57, 1971.

Slatta, Richard W. “Taking our Myths Seriously.” Journal of the West, vol. 40, no. 3, 2001, pp. 3-5.

Siegel, Reva B. “Dead or Alive: Originalism as Popular Constitutionalism in Heller.” Harvard Law Review, vol. 122, 2008, pp. 191-245. 

Siegel, Reva B. “How 'History and Tradition' Perpetuates Inequality: Dobbs on Abortion's Nineteenth-Century Criminalization.” Houston Law Review, vol. 60, no. 4, 2023, pp. 901-936. 

Smith, Michael L. “Historical Tradition: A Vague, Overconfident, and Malleable Approach to Constitutional Law.” Brooklyn Law Review, vol. 88, no. 3, 2023, pp. 797-838. 

Smith, Rogers M. “Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple Traditions in America.” The American Political Science Review, vol. 87, no. 3, Sept. 1993, pp. 549-566. 

Steele, Brian. “Thinking with Jefferson in the Age of Gatsby: Narratives of the Founding in American Political Discourse.” Amerikastudien / American Studies, vol. 61, no. 1, 2016, pp. 69-94.

Strauss, David A. “Book Review (reviewing Jack M. Balkin, Living Originalism (2011)).” Law and Philosophy, vol. 32, 2013, pp. 369-375. 

Sunstein, Cass R. “The Idea of a Useable Past.” Columbia Law Review, vol. 95, 1995, pp. 601-608. 

Susman, Warren I. “History and the American Intellectual: Uses of a Usable Past.” American Quarterly, vol. 16, no. 2, 1964, pp. 243-263. JSTOR, doi:10.2307/2711041. 

Trau, Amanda. “The Superficial Application of Originalism in Dobbs: Could a More Comprehensive Approach Protect Abortion Rights?” Fordham Urban Law Journal, vol. 50, no. 4, 2023, pp. 867-905. 

Turner, Frederick J. The Frontier in American History. H. Holt and Company, 1920.

United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. Fraser v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, et al. Justia, 10 May 2023, https://dockets.justia.com/docket/virginia/vaedce/3:2022cv00410/524643.

United States, Supreme Court. New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen. Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 23 June 2022, https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/20-843. 

United States, Supreme Court. Washington v. Glucksberg. Legal Information Institute, Cornell Law School, 26 June 1997, https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/96-110.ZS.html. 

Waldstreicher, David. In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes: The Making of American Nationalism, 1776-1820. University of North Carolina Press, 1997.

Wood, Gordon. “Pauline Maier: In Memoriam.” American Political Thought, vol. 2, no. 2, 2013. doi:10.1086/673933. 

Zarefsky, David. “In Search of the Founding Fathers: Historical Argument in the Lincoln-Douglas Debates.” Conference Proceedings -- National Communication Association/American Forensic Association, 1985, pp. 179-182.